------ Miracle ------
--- Unknown ---
My mummy says I'm a miracle.
My daddy says I'm his special little guy.
I am a princess,
And I am a prince.
Mum says I'm an angel sent down from the sky.
--- Unknown ---
My daddy says I'm his special little soldier.
No one is as handsome, strong as me.
It's true he indulges my tendency to bulge,
But I'm his little soldier!
Hop, 2-4-3!
--- Chorus: ---
My mummy says I'm a miracle.
One look at my face, and it's plain to see.
Ever since the day doc chopped the umbilical cord,
It's been clear there's no peer for a miracle like me!
--- Unknown ---
My daddy says I'm his special little soldier.
No one is as bold or tough as me.
Has my daddy told you,
One day when I'm older,
I can be a soldier,
And shoot you in the face?
--- Unknown ---
One can hardly move for beauty and brilliance these days.
It seems that there are millions of these one-in-a-millions these days.
Special-ness seems de rigueur.
Above average is average - go figure.
Is it is some modern miracle of calculus,
That such frequent miracles don't render each one un-miraculous?
--- Repeat Chorus ---
--- Unknown ---
My mummy says I'm a precious barrelina.
She has never seen a prettier barrelina.
She says if I'm keen, I have to cut down on the cream,
But I'm a barrelina, SO GIVE ME MORE CAKE!
--- Unknown ---
Take another picture of our angel in that costume that I made.
The role of tree has never been portrayed with such convincing sway.
That's right, honey, look at mummy!
Don't put honey on your brother.
Smile for mummy; smile for mother!
I think she blinked.
Well, take another!
Have you seen his school report? He got a 'C' on his report!
What?!
We'll have to change his school. That teacher's clearly falling short.
She's just delightful. So precarious and insightful.
Might she be a little brighter than the norm?
I know to boys it's frightful form!
--- Unknown ---
(Take another!)
My mummy says I'm a miracle.
One look at my face, and it's plain to see.
Ever since the day doc chopped the umbilical cord,
It's been clear there's no peer for a miracle like me!
--- Unknown ---
My mummy says I'm a miracle.
That I'm as tiny and as shiny as a mirror ball.
You can be all cynical, but it's a truth empirical.
There's never been a miracle, a miracle, a miracle as me!
--- Interlude ---
--- Unknown ---
Every life I bring into this world restores my faith in humankind.
Each new-born life, a canvas yet unpainted...
This still unbroken skin...
This uncorrupted mind...
--- Bridge: ---
Every life is unbelievably unlikely.
The chances of existence, almost infinitely small.
The most common thing in life is life,
And yet every single life bearing new life is a miracle!
Miracle!
--- Interlude ---
--- Unknown ---
Oh, my undercarriage doesn't feel quite normal.
My skin looks just revolting in this foul fluorescent light,
And this gown is nothing like the semi-formal, semi-Spanish gown
I should be wearing in the semi-finals tonight.
I should be dancing the tarantella -
Cui buon fare Italiano. [Italian: With good Italian manner]
--- Unknown ---
Not dressed in hospital cotton,
With a smarting front bottom,
And this horrible -
Smelly little -
Weakly little bowl of fat!
Would someone give this thing a bottle?
Or swap it for a later model!
--- Unknown ---
Why do bad things always happen to good people?
Fine, upstanding citizens like you and me?
Why, when we've done nothing wrong,
Should this disaster come along?
This horrible, weird-looking,
Hairy little stinky feet...
With no sign of a winky-dink at all!
--- Unknown ---
Miracle! Miracle!
She's a miracle!
A Miracle!
Every life's a miracle!
The most beautiful miracle I have ever seen!
--- Unknown ---
I can't find his frank & beans!
--- Repeat Bridge ---
--- Repeat Chorus ---
--- Unknown ---
My mummy says I'm a lousy little worm.
My daddy says I'm a bore.
My mummy says I'm a jumped-up little germ,
That kids like me should be against the law.
My daddy says I should learn to shut my pie hole.
No one likes a smart-mouthed girl like me.
Mum says I'm a good case for population control.
------ fin ------
